hi there this is dawn Ross for Jam
play.com now a lot of people who learn
finger style guitar have heard about
Travis picking them unnecessarily know
why it's called that or what it is
necessarily well as a bit of a
antecedent to that I'll quote the great
Leo Kottke Leo Kottke put it really well
he said if you want to play finger style
guitar first learn the patterns and then
second unlearn the patterns it was
really good advice learning the patterns
the picking patterns really gets you
going gets your hands moving especially
your right hand it helps you to develop
a lot of dexterity and the patterns end
up being an open door to a whole lot of
repertoire as well because so many
picking patterns have been used as the
basis of so many famous songs think of
songs like the boxer by Simon &
Garfunkel or think of leader of the band
by Dan Fogelberg or whatever all these
songs have a very strong Travis picking
pattern in them now Travis picking gets
its name from Merle Travis who was sort
of a country blues picker and the most
famous in the middle part of the 20th
century and what he was famous for was
coming up with a sort of a finger picked
kind of accompaniment to his songs now
he mostly just from what I've heard I'm
not a I'm not a big expert on Merle
Travis music what I've heard from other
players is that he mostly just used his
thumb and his first finger to create his
pattern and so he'd be playing this kind
of thing
just using his thumb in this first
finger and it sounded great it was very
rhythmic
what happened is through the 60s and 70s
and later people started taking that
pattern and developing it and turning it
into something quite a bit bigger and
maybe in a lot a lot ways a lot of ways
more useful in a lot of different kind
of contexts you could use these patterns
to play pop music to play folk music to
play country music to play blues music
it could be very very you know used
across a whole lot of different genres
and so for that reason it's a really
good place to start in terms of getting
your hands moving finger style so what
we'll do first is we'll look at the role
of the thumb and Travis picking now the
thumb is pretty much always not just
playing bass notes but also really
keeping time in a big way and in this
pattern you'll see that it's it's really
really important so for example let's
start with a G chord we're in standard
tuning
alright and with the standard tuning
we're just gonna play the the regular
sort of six string G chord now there's a
couple of different ways of fingering
the G chord a lot of us learn it this
way with the the B string open like this
and a lot of it learn it look this way
with a D note here on the B string of
the third fret so they have slightly
different sounds here's the one with the
open B and here's the one with the D on
the B string just a little bit different
so what I'll do is I'll use this sort of
more third heavy by third I mean this
this note is the third of the chord and
it's really really apparent I'm gonna
use that chord voicing and to teach this
pattern now with chords like G the
lowest note the lowest G note in the
voicing is here on the sixth string here
at the third fret of the sixth string
you have the note G now that G ends up
being the first note in the pattern
because it's what's called the root so
the root the lowest G in the G chord so
the the note basically that gives the
chord its name that's what we're going
to start the pattern with so we use our
thumb and we go to the sixth string we
play that note on the sixth string the G
now the pattern we're going to do with
our thumb circulates between primarily
for the G chord circulates between
string six and string four
so essentially you're going to be
counting time with your thumb like this
in a 4/4 pattern you'd be going 1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4 and that just keeps going and
going like the ever ready buddy all
right
so what you want after a while is you
want your thumb that alternating thumb
part to be kind of like autopilot kind
of like we're to the point where you
don't have to think about it your thumb
just does it it just keeps time it
becomes like tapping your foot so it's
not like a heartbeat because you don't
have to think about your heartbeat but
when you tap your foot you have to kind
of think about it well when you think
about it a little bit and then just let
it go and let other stuff happen like I
can talk and do it at the same time
awesome I can't do that chew gum at the
same time but anyway then what we can do
is that that ends up being our four-four
time one two three four one two three
four it's really just a pattern of two
beats that gets repeated once so total
of four math math and music are not as
related as arithmetic and music or
anyway so we're doing the on beats with
our thumb and then the fingers fill in
on the offbeat's so in other words what
we're gonna do I thumb is going to be
counting one two three four and our
finger is going to play in double time
the notes between the notes okay it's
going to split these what are called
quarter notes up into two eighth notes
so we're going to fit treble notes in
between the bass notes so we'll end up
counting like 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 1 & 2 & 3
& 4
so the 1 2 3 4 is still there on our
thumb but our fingers are going to fill
in the anne's 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 and like
this let's just try this with thumb and
first finger to start with okay
thumb is alternating between 6 & 4 2 3 4
1 2 3 4 our first finger let's assign it
to our third string the g string so it's
a g chord so there's an open G there and
what we're gonna do is for now we're
just going to go 1 &
and three and four and one and two and
three and four and we're doing
everything with just the thumb and the
first finger one and two and three and
four and one and two and three
so already we've set up a little
rhythmic pattern
with some of the notes that make up a G
chord not all of them but some of them
okay let's add a wrinkle to that let's
make the thumb part a little more
interesting instead of just going
between strings six and four
let's add a variation to the pattern
where we go six four and then five four
okay so we end up with one two three
four one two three four so what we're
doing is we're incorporating more of the
notes in the chord to make it sound
fuller right again
just with the first finger here so thumb
doing alternating six four five four and
the thumb playing the offbeat I started
rather the finger first finger playing
the offbeat's
in between the notes there let's try it
together one two three four
[Music]
one and two and three and four and
and four and one and two
one more bar one-and two-and
and four and stop all right great one
more wrinkle let's add another string
now what we're going to do is we're
going to be using our thumb and first
finger but also finger number two okay
with guitar playing what we tend to do
is we've numbered the number the fingers
thumb and then one two three four so
thumbs going to continue doing what it
was doing the thumb part hasn't changed
much
again we're alternating
six four five four quarter notes like
that then on the eighth note and the
offbeat we're gonna add this string like
we were
and then after we play string 4 we're
gonna play string 2 with finger number 2
and this is what it sounds like just the
first part of the pattern
1 & 2 and I've just done half the bar
there the other half of the pattern is
[Music]
so the finger part essentially keeps
repeating it's like we get the on beat
and we get string three
on beat string - on beat string three on
each string - so like this one and two
and three and four and one and two three
and
and two and three
and to
[Music]
[Applause]
two more bars one-and two-and three-and
one-and two-and three-and four-and stop
great now that works really well for the
G chord starting on string 6 y again
well because that root note is on the
sixth string so it's the important
string to start with so what that means
is any chord that you play in this first
position for example any chord that you
play that has that root on the sixth
string you can play that pattern and
should work just great so let's try a
different chord let's try something like
e minor ok because we're gonna stay in
the key of G G and E minor have a lot of
the same notes in them so they sound
good one after the other so when we go
to the E minor chord now we're playing
the 6th string open to get that e
alright so there's our root of the e
minor chord
and we'll play the exact same right hand
pattern with the E minor chord let's
start with the simpler one where we just
use one finger like this together 1 & 2
& 3 & 4 and
[Music]
so string numbers 6 3 4 3 5 3 4 3 6 3 4
3 5 3 4 3 time 1 & 2 & 3 &
and one and two and three and four and
stop now let's try the same exercise but
adding the second finger on the second
string like this listen once three four
[Music]
so string numbers are like this
six three four two five three four two
and the time is still just 4/4 time one
and two and three and four and one and
two and three
yeah let's try that together all right
one two three on the E minor chord and N
two and three and four and one and two
and three and four and
[Applause]
strings six three four two five three
four two
[Music]
[Applause]
good now the next the next wrinkle would
be to go back and forth between those
two cords okay so maybe what we would do
is do two bars of G and then two bars of
e minor so altogether we'll have this
little exercise that's four bars long
listen once then we'll try it together
it would sound like this one two three
four one and two and three and one and
two and three switch to E minor one and
two and three and four
back to G
[Music]
back to a minor
[Applause]
[Music]
and stop
now as far as the pattern that starts on
the sixth string like that another
really great thing to do with these
chords that are their chords that have
the root on the sixth string and also
the voicings use all six strings so it'd
be nice to come up with a version of the
pattern they used all six strings
because hey you know fuller is usually
better more notes is usually more
interesting than fewer notes right most
of the time not always most of the time
so let's try adding one more wrinkle to
the pattern making it just that little
bit more challenging and by doing it
this way we start using finger number
three now I know that this for a lot of
people is a big challenge a lot of
people find doing thumb and first two
fingers not too bad
thumb and all three fingers it's getting
into you know how to walk and chew gum
territory so that's alright we'll get
there so let's start with our very basic
pattern on G like this together three
and four and one
that's just with the first finger add
the second finger
[Music]
right
now what we're gonna do is we're gonna
add the third finger
what ends up happening to happen is you
you have to play the pattern over the
course of two bars so what we'll end up
doing is thumb first finger thumb second
finger thumb first finger thumb third
finger and that third finger is going to
be playing on the high string on string
number one
okay so again assign your fingers to the
string so finger number one on string
number three right here finger number
two on string number two and finger
number three on string number one and
this way you won't have to you know
second and third guess Oh what finger do
I use on that string one just be really
strict with yourself for now and then it
makes the pattern that much easier to
play so here's here we're gonna start
just with the first finger then with the
second two fingers then I'll add I'll
introduce the third finger and see if
you can fall right in I'll go back and
just do that the pattern with a third
finger on its own so here we go
three four just the first finger
[Music]
add the second finger on the B string
do that another couple of times
one-and two-and three-and
now see if you can fall in here I'll
come back to this
[Music]
so what I did there was I took the same
pattern that we've been working up
towards using fingers 1 & 2 and every
second time that I would be using my
second finger I use my third finger
instead on the high string all right
so breaking it down really slowly it's
like this thumb first finger on 3rd
string thumb on the 4th string then 2nd
finger on the second string
thumb again on the bottom string
followed by the 3rd string the first
finger followed by the thumb again on
the 4th string and then this time we
play the high string with our third
finger so listen again
[Music]
this way we're playing all six strings
in the court
[Music]
let's try it together one two three four
and one and two and three and four
[Music]
string numbers it's like this six three
four two five three four one
[Music]
[Applause]
the time is still just a 4/4 bar
one and two and
[Music]
stop
so that longer pattern fits all in a 4/4
bar essentially what you're doing is
you're taking a two beat pattern that we
first learned and making it twice as
long by adding that high string and then
it makes for a really interesting
sounding bar now the last wrinkle in
that little section where we're doing a
Travis pattern starting on with root on
the sixth string let's go back and forth
between two chords like we did earlier
okay the same two chords G and E minor
but this time with the fuller sounding
pattern where we use all six strings
like I said earlier the G
and the e minor our voicings that use
all six strings so this pattern will
sound great because it's a six string
pattern in the end alright and we're
using thumb and all three of our picking
fingers so let's let's try it going from
e a gene G to E minor listen once what
I'll do is I'll do two bars of G and
then two bars of E minor back and forth
so it'll sound like this
[Music]
[Applause]
we switch now
yes which little early that
back to G
[Music]
as you can see what I'm doing it slowly
like this I'm sort of trying to
discipline myself to try to play this
last note on the G chord before I switch
to the E minor makes it a bit
challenging if you end up with a
that's okay it'll sound great because
you're going to the E minor chord anyway
so don't sweat it too much let's try it
together one and two and three and four
and
[Music]
[Applause]
back to G
[Music]
to be minor
two more times
[Music]
my mistake there that's better
last time
[Music]
[Applause]
great now that pattern that six-string
for for pattern is something that you
can use in a whole lot of different
contexts and eventually you'll want to
speed it up maybe depending on the piece
of music
[Applause]
it sounds a bit more like a sort of a
folk song there or you could even make
it almost like a bluegrass kind of thing
if it really speeded up okay so that's
where we're headed towards with this
with this pattern as we develop speed
with it
so there's your sixth string picking
pattern and we'll be using it a lot here
on Jam play